---
title: Finite State Machine
---

# Finite State Machine

or shortly `FSM`, is a control object, that:

-   has an enumerable set of control states, named `State` for simplicity
-   stores local `Context` for every `State` and can modify it when transitioning to another `State`
-   reacts to dispatched `Actions`, transitioning to another `State`, based on current `Context` and dispatched `Payload`.
    The transition is
    -   atomic
    -   transactional
    -   synchronous
-   can reactively observe `Events`, translating them into `Actions`
-   can emit `Events` when transitioning to certain `States`

Essentially, Yantrix generates a code module in any of Supported Languages,
containing a [Mealy Machine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mealy_machine) implementation, which behaviour is described
by
slightly extended [Mermaid](https://mermaid.js.org/) diagrams.

More academical info on the subject:

-   [State diagram](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/State_diagram)
-   [Automata bases programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automata-based_programming)
-   [Algorithmic state machine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algorithmic_state_machine)

## States

`State` is enumerable constant, specific for a particular business process. That process is then modeled as a graph of
transitions between `States` and can declare rules of data transformation applied to each of them.

The purpose of `State` to describe minimum variety of values that significantly impact the behavious of the modeled system. Modeling with `States` takes some practice, but in the end it grants a lot of benefits, some of them being:

-   Atomicity of logic and clear responsibility patterns
-   As much synchronous code as possible
-   Transactional updates with pre-defined behaviour for each transition
-   Similar representation for various data sources, allowing for reproducible primitives and complex behaviours built from them

Every `State` can have an attached `Payload`, which is a plain data object that stores quantifiable attributes which describe a given `State`.

## Actions

`Actions` are plain object that are _dispatched_ ("fed") to `FSM` via:

-   an [API](../API-Reference/),
-   using [Integrations](../integrations/)
-   from `Event Bus` using `Event Adapter` and mappings, declared in the diagram

An `Action` might also carry a `Payload`, which are plain data objects. The `States` are switching as in response to `Actions`, one at a time, and they can use `Payload` properties to define behavior and processing rules. In the diagram `Actions` are declared as names of transitions. If not specified, `Action` name is assigned automatically based on its traversal path.

Note that by default declared `Actions` can only be dispatched when the `FSM` is in relevant `State`, otherwise the `Action` is ignored. If an `Action` is declared as transition from `[*]`, it can be invoked from any `State` and performs the corresponding transition.

## Forks

Nodes that are declared using Mermaid's `<<choice>>` directive are not translated into `States`, but rather represent a
conditional transition, that can resolve into different `States` and attached transition rules. To define a fork:

-   create a `<<choice>>` node
-   define an `Action` in the transition incoming to that node
-   label the outgoing transitions from that node with a `Predicate` that can draw properties both from current `Context`
    and the incoming `Payload`.

**Notice:** `Predicates` are being validated in order of appearance, so mind the sequence.
