README.md, before:

# Yantrix—Opinionated FSM Framework

Yantrix is a TypeScript framework that provides a set of tools to create robust and self-documented functional applications by code generation.
The business logic is represented by declarative, event-driven [finite state machines](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite-state_machine), while the application state is an [Anemic Domain Model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anemic_domain_model), making it great a counterpart to any traditional state manager like [Redux](https://redux.js.org/), while allowing devs to focus on describing contracts and workflows, rather than writing and debugging the
actual code.

Lends itself perfectly to [Architecture-as-Code](https://jondavid-black.github.io/AaC/) paradigm and no-code/less-code tools for developers, like [n8n](https://github.com/n8n-io/n8n).

<!-- TOC -->

-   [Installation](#installation)
-   [Core Concepts](#core-concepts)
    -   [Ontology](#ontology)
        -   [Data Model](#data-model)
        -   [Events](#events)
        -   [Slices](#slices)
        -   [FSM](#fsm)
        -   [Event Adapter](#event-adapter)
        -   [Predicates](#predicates)
        -   [Transformers](#transformers)
        -   [Effects](#effects)
        -   [Sources and Destinations](#sources-and-destinations)
        -   [Storage](#storage)
    -   [Event Stack](#event-stack)
        -   [Data Flow](#data-flow)

<!-- TOC -->

## Installation

To install Yantrix, you can use NPM or Yarn:

```
npm install yantrix
```

or

```
yarn add yantrix
```

## Contributing

To work with the current version, you need Lerna. After cloning the repo, run

```shell
npm install
lerna bootstrap
npm build
```

That will produce Javascript module files along with `d.ts` type definitions

Always create a new branch from `main` with `git checkout -b <your_contribution_name>`. Make the changes you want and then create a PR with them.

## Core Concepts

Yantrix suggests the following application model:

-   Responsibility layers are built in accordance with a slightly adapted [MVC approach](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model%E2%80%93view%E2%80%93controller)
-   an [Event-Driven Architecture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Event-driven_architecture) is used to communicate between layers of "Controller" part, with a globally available dictionary of `Events`, specific for the Application
-   _"Controller"_ is composed of `Slices`, which are sets of interconnected `FSMs` (finite state machines), which communicate with `Events` and produce `Effects` to update the _"Model"_
-   _"View"_ part (including UI and external I/O) is updated asynchronously with a **Render Loop**
-   I/O streams are non-duplex and are separated into `Sources`, which generate `Events` for "Controller", and `Destinations`, which are updated when the _"Model"_ has changed
-   _"Model"_ component is a serializable ([anemic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anemic_domain_model)) data structure (`Data Model`), which provides a single global store for the whole application, though it can and should be built with composition of `Slices`. It can be propagated to external `Storages` in an asynchronous **Sync Loop**
-   the **Main Loop** is taking `Events` from UI and I/O and repeatedly updates the `Data Model` and `Slices` internal states based on their internal rules

### Ontology

```mermaid
erDiagram
    DataModel ||..o{ Storage: "updates"
    DataModel ||--o{ ModelPredicates: declares
    DataModel ||..o{ UIComponent: "updates"
    UIComponent ||..|{ EventStack: "emits Events"
    EventDictionary ||--|{ EventMetaType: "is mapped to"
    EventStack ||..o{ EventDictionary: "maps to"
    FSM ||..|{ EventAdapter: references
    FSM ||..o{ ActionPayloadType: references
    FSM ||..o{ StateContextType: references
    StorageAdapter ||..|{ Storage: "syncs with"
    Slice ||..o{ EventDictionary: references
    Slice ||--o{ ActionDictionary: declares
    Slice ||--o{ FSM: "consists of"
    Slice ||--o{ StateDictionary: declares
    Slice ||--o{ StorageAdapter: declares
    Slice ||--|{ EffectMatrix: declares
    StateDictionary ||--o{ StateContextType: "is mapped to"
    StateDictionary ||..|{ ContextPredicates: "declares"
    ActionDictionary ||--o{ ActionPayloadType: "is mapped to"
    Effect ||..|{ DataModel: updates
    EffectMatrix ||--o{ Effect: declares
    Application ||--|{ Slice: "consists of"
    Application ||--o{ UIComponent: "is represented by"
    Application ||--|{ DataModel: declares
    DataModel ||..o{ Destinations: updates
    Application ||--o{ Destinations: declares
    EventAdapter ||..|{ EventStack: "translates Events"
    Sources ||..|{ EventStack: "emits Events"
    Application ||..o{ Sources: "declares"
```

#### Data Model

All the App states are stored in a single anemic object structure, which is persisted between runs and deterministically describe the behavior of the App. Designing the proper `Data Model` is the essential and the most important step to start laying out logic using `Events` and `Slices`.

`Data Model` contract can be composited from `Slices`, much like [Redux Toolkit](https://redux-toolkit.js.org/) does

#### Events

`Event Dictionary` is an enumerable set of constants (`Events`) that is shared throughout the App. `Events` represent every significant atomic change in the App state and are the default way to propagate updates throughout the rest of the architecture. Every `Event` type is associated with a particular type contract named `Event Meta`, which is typically implemented as generic type `TEventMetaType<TEventType>`. `Event Meta` can be irrelevant for certain `Event` types, in which case the `null` value and type is used.

#### Slices

`Slices` are independent parts of business logic layer, each having its own `Effect Matrix` and a set of `FSMs`. `Slices` are a suggested way to chop the App logic into independent smaller pieces, which

-   reduces the complexity of `Data Model` and provides a clear concern separation
-   enables for better performance and smart caching
-   enables for smooth refactoring of the resulting App to microservices or micro-frontends if it gets too intertwined

#### FSM

The basic building block of state logic is a `FSM` (more specifically - a [Mealy Machine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mealy_machine)), which exposes a predefined `Transition Matrix` that comprises the relations between `States` and `Actions`, representing the decision tree of the machine. Every `Action`
type can have a derived `Payload` type, while every `State` has a dependent `Context`, and the latter two represent the current internal state of the machine.

`Actions`/`Payloads` and `States`/`Contexts` are enumerable values that can be composed of different Dictionaries, and can be reused independently on each other. It's perfectly fine to create several `FSMs` that operate either on the same set of `Actions` or `States`, or both.

#### Event Adapter

Unless `FSM` includes an `Event Adapater`, it would not accept or emit `Events` into the `Event Stack` and can only be controlled directly. However, in most cases it's desirable to connect it to the `Event Stack` via a pub/sub mechanism, which contains asymmetrical `Mapping Matrix`, that is responsible for:

-   Casting handled `Events` into `Actions`, including mapping of `Event Meta` to `Payload`
-   Producing `Events` from `State` changes, including mapping of `Context` to `Event Meta`

The reason `Event Adapter` is separated from `FSM` is reusability. If two `FSMs` share compatible contracts of `Actions`
and `States`, they can use the same `Event Adapter` too, if needed.

#### Predicates

`Predicates` are functions that return a Boolean value and are used to fork the flow of operations inside `FSMs`. All `Predicates` are high-order functions that allow compositing them. They come in three flavors:

-   `Built-in Predicates` are used to combine other `Predicates` and implement logical operations like `not`, `and` and so on.
-   `Model Predicates` have a `Data Model` as a dependency and are supposed to implement conditions that rely on the current state of `Application`
-   `Context Predicates` are bound to a certain `Slice` and its `State Dictionary`, and have a `State`/`Context` pair as a dependency. It's designed to create decision branching inside a `Transition Matrix`

#### Effects

`Effects` are pure high-order functions that update `Data Model` based on its current state and emitted `Events`, very similar to the way `FSMs` operate (and Redux's _reducers_). However, `FSMs` cannot alter the `Data Model` directly, locked inside their local scope, they can emit `Events` through the `Event Adapter`, which is mapped to a particular `Effect` by the `Effect Matrix` of the owning slice.

All the `Effects` triggered by different slices are batched every iteration of `Main Loop`, yielding exactly one (or none) `Data Model` update regardless of how many `FSM` transitions were performed.

#### Transformers

`Transformers` are projection-type functions that come with `Slice` and translate the same types between each other. They can be:

-   `Context Transformers` translate `Contexts` between each other. They are used inside `Transition Matrix` to update the internal data of the `FSM` when changing `States`. They are defined as a part of `State Dictionary`
-   `Reducer Transformers` translate from `State`+`Action/Payload` to `State/Context`
-   `Model Transformers` are a subtype of `Effects` which is context-free and is basically a function that mutates the `Data Model`. They can be composed with `Predicates` to produce `Effects`
-   `Generic Transformers` are built-in and user-defined pure functions that operate on any contract type and map the values. They are the basic building blocks of data manipulation.

#### Sources and Destinations

`Sources` and `Destinations` are abstractions for, respectively, input and output channels of the App. They include, but not limited to:

-   Internal Timers inside App
-   Remote API calls with various protocols for backend Apps
-   Hardware controls and UI interaction for frontend Apps
-   Message brokers, like Kafka or RabbitMQ
-   Network transports, like WebRTC or UDP streams
-   Environmental calls, i.e. pipes, sockets, system clock, file system, OS or WEB APIs

Every particular kind of `Source` or `Destination` is represented by a corresponding class:

-   `ISourceEmitter` for `Source` channels, which allows to declare rules of publishing `Events` from `Source`. That could be done via subscription, long and short polling or by exposing hook methods to be used directly throughout the App, notably in frontend `UI Components` and/or webserver routes.
-   `IDestinationGateway` for `Destination` channels, which observes the `Data Model` and propagates the required changes into the target endpoint

#### Storage

`Storage` is an adapter class to persist the `Data Model` and to load its snapshot, like:

-   LocalStorage for web apps
-   in-memory key storages, like Redis
-   Databases, like Mongo or Postgres
-   Physical and cloud file systems
-   Distributed storages like Blockchain or IPFS

The App can have multiple `Storages` which can store different subsets of `Data Model`. When the App starts, it polls all the Storages and integrates the received data into an initial `Data Model` snapshot, using composition of Selectors.

### Event Stack

Input streams (`UI Components` and `Sources`) and `FSMs` are emitting `Events`, that are put into a special LIFO structure, known as `Event Stack`. It is processed continuously by the `Main Loop`, which handles them one by one, always taking the last emitted `Event` and passing it to all connected `Slices`, and thus `FSMs`

#### Data Flow

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    box rgba(25,0,25,0.25) [Representation Layer]<br/>~~~</br>UIs, APIs, Sockets, Timers
    participant DST as Destinations
    participant SRC as Sources
    participant VL as UI
    actor User as I/O
    end
    box rgba(0,25,0,0.25) [Business Logic Layer]<br/>~~~</br>Declarative Code, Language Models, GUI Editor
    participant MT as Main Loop (Event Model)
    participant EA as Event Adapter (Mapping Matrix)
    participant FSM as FSM (Transition Matrix)
    participant ED as Effect Dictionary(Reduction Matrix)
    end
    box rgba(50,0,0,0.25) [Data Model Layer]<br/>~~~</br>Memory, DBs, Cloud Storage,<br/> File System, Blockchain
    participant MDL as Store (Anemic Data)
    participant DB as Storages (Persistent)
    end
    User -->> VL: User input
    DB -->> MDL: Sync application state on launch
    Note over SRC, User: Events are emitted by Sources
    VL -->> MT: TAutomataEventMetaType<eventId>
    SRC -->> MT: TAutomataEventMetaType<eventId>
    Note over MT: Incoming Events are pushed to Event Stack
    loop Process Event Stack every 1/60s
        Note over MT, ED: Pop Event from Event Stack
        activate MT
        MT ->>+ EA: TAutomataEventMetaType<eventId>
        rect rgba(25,25,25,0.5)
            Note over EA, FSM: Translates Events to Actions, as defined by Event Adapter
            EA ->> FSM: TAutomataEventMetaType<eventId> => TAutomataActionPayload<actionId>
            Note over FSM: Declarative Pure Function (Mealy Machine)<br/>Derives new Context based on incoming Actions and current Context
            FSM ->> FSM: TAutomataStateContext<stateId>, TAutomataActionPayload<actionId> => TAutomataStateContext<stateId>
            Note over EA, FSM: Translates Context to Event, as defined by Event Adapter
            FSM ->> EA: TAutomataStateContext<stateId>
        end
        Note over EA, MT: Emits Events based on resolved local Context
        EA ->>- MT: TAutomataStateContext<stateId> => TAutomataEventMetaType<eventId>
        note over MT: Push Event to Event Stack
        MT ->> MT: TAutomataEventMetaType<eventId>
        rect rgba(25,25,25,0.5)
            Note over MT, ED: Generate Effects as defined by Effect Matrix
            MT ->> ED: TAutomataEventMetaType<eventId>
            Note over ED, MDL: Update Model based on its current state and generated Events
            ED ->> MDL: TAutomataEventMetaType<eventId>, Store => Store
            MDL -->> DB: Sync to Storages
            MDL ->> MT: Proceed to the newest Event in Event Stack
        end
    end
    Note over MT: Store subscribers are updated
    MT -->>+ DST: Update Destinations based on Model changes
    MT -->>+ VL: Update UI based on Model changes
    VL -->>- User: Render
    DST -->>- User: API Calls
```

Commit message:

Adjust the documentation for Lerna, and README.md (#25)
* chore: adjust lerna docs

* chore: correction of inaccuracies in README.md related to the transition to yarn

README.md, after:

# Yantrix—Opinionated FSM Framework

Yantrix is a TypeScript framework that provides a set of tools to create robust and self-documented functional applications by code generation.
The business logic is represented by declarative, event-driven [finite state machines](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite-state_machine), while the application state is an [Anemic Domain Model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anemic_domain_model), making it great a counterpart to any traditional state manager like [Redux](https://redux.js.org/), while allowing devs to focus on describing contracts and workflows, rather than writing and debugging the
actual code.

Lends itself perfectly to [Architecture-as-Code](https://jondavid-black.github.io/AaC/) paradigm and no-code/less-code tools for developers, like [n8n](https://github.com/n8n-io/n8n).

<!-- TOC -->

-   [Installation](#installation)
-   [Core Concepts](#core-concepts)
    -   [Ontology](#ontology)
        -   [Data Model](#data-model)
        -   [Events](#events)
        -   [Slices](#slices)
        -   [FSM](#fsm)
        -   [Event Adapter](#event-adapter)
        -   [Predicates](#predicates)
        -   [Transformers](#transformers)
        -   [Effects](#effects)
        -   [Sources and Destinations](#sources-and-destinations)
        -   [Storage](#storage)
    -   [Event Stack](#event-stack)
        -   [Data Flow](#data-flow)

<!-- TOC -->

## Installation

To install Yantrix, you can use NPM, Yarn or PNPM:

```bash
npm install yantrix
# or
yarn add yantrix
# or
pnpm install yantrix
```

## Contributing

This project uses [**Yarn**](https://yarnpkg.com/), so make sure you have it installed globally. If not, install it using your package manager.

To get started, first clone the repository using:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/tfcp68/yantrix.git
```

Navigate to the project folder:

```bash
cd ./yantrix
```

Install all dependencies:

```bash
yarn
```

Build all packages using:

```bash
yarn build
```

That will produce Javascript module files along with `d.ts` type definitions.

Always create a new branch from `main` with `git checkout -b <your_contribution_name>`. Make the changes you want and then create a PR with them.

## Core Concepts

Yantrix suggests the following application model:

-   Responsibility layers are built in accordance with a slightly adapted [MVC approach](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model%E2%80%93view%E2%80%93controller)
-   an [Event-Driven Architecture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Event-driven_architecture) is used to communicate between layers of "Controller" part, with a globally available dictionary of `Events`, specific for the Application
-   _"Controller"_ is composed of `Slices`, which are sets of interconnected `FSMs` (finite state machines), which communicate with `Events` and produce `Effects` to update the _"Model"_
-   _"View"_ part (including UI and external I/O) is updated asynchronously with a **Render Loop**
-   I/O streams are non-duplex and are separated into `Sources`, which generate `Events` for "Controller", and `Destinations`, which are updated when the _"Model"_ has changed
-   _"Model"_ component is a serializable ([anemic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anemic_domain_model)) data structure (`Data Model`), which provides a single global store for the whole application, though it can and should be built with composition of `Slices`. It can be propagated to external `Storages` in an asynchronous **Sync Loop**
-   the **Main Loop** is taking `Events` from UI and I/O and repeatedly updates the `Data Model` and `Slices` internal states based on their internal rules

### Ontology

```mermaid
erDiagram
    DataModel ||..o{ Storage: "updates"
    DataModel ||--o{ ModelPredicates: declares
    DataModel ||..o{ UIComponent: "updates"
    UIComponent ||..|{ EventStack: "emits Events"
    EventDictionary ||--|{ EventMetaType: "is mapped to"
    EventStack ||..o{ EventDictionary: "maps to"
    FSM ||..|{ EventAdapter: references
    FSM ||..o{ ActionPayloadType: references
    FSM ||..o{ StateContextType: references
    StorageAdapter ||..|{ Storage: "syncs with"
    Slice ||..o{ EventDictionary: references
    Slice ||--o{ ActionDictionary: declares
    Slice ||--o{ FSM: "consists of"
    Slice ||--o{ StateDictionary: declares
    Slice ||--o{ StorageAdapter: declares
    Slice ||--|{ EffectMatrix: declares
    StateDictionary ||--o{ StateContextType: "is mapped to"
    StateDictionary ||..|{ ContextPredicates: "declares"
    ActionDictionary ||--o{ ActionPayloadType: "is mapped to"
    Effect ||..|{ DataModel: updates
    EffectMatrix ||--o{ Effect: declares
    Application ||--|{ Slice: "consists of"
    Application ||--o{ UIComponent: "is represented by"
    Application ||--|{ DataModel: declares
    DataModel ||..o{ Destinations: updates
    Application ||--o{ Destinations: declares
    EventAdapter ||..|{ EventStack: "translates Events"
    Sources ||..|{ EventStack: "emits Events"
    Application ||..o{ Sources: "declares"
```

#### Data Model

All the App states are stored in a single anemic object structure, which is persisted between runs and deterministically describe the behavior of the App. Designing the proper `Data Model` is the essential and the most important step to start laying out logic using `Events` and `Slices`.

`Data Model` contract can be composited from `Slices`, much like [Redux Toolkit](https://redux-toolkit.js.org/) does

#### Events

`Event Dictionary` is an enumerable set of constants (`Events`) that is shared throughout the App. `Events` represent every significant atomic change in the App state and are the default way to propagate updates throughout the rest of the architecture. Every `Event` type is associated with a particular type contract named `Event Meta`, which is typically implemented as generic type `TEventMetaType<TEventType>`. `Event Meta` can be irrelevant for certain `Event` types, in which case the `null` value and type is used.

#### Slices

`Slices` are independent parts of business logic layer, each having its own `Effect Matrix` and a set of `FSMs`. `Slices` are a suggested way to chop the App logic into independent smaller pieces, which

-   reduces the complexity of `Data Model` and provides a clear concern separation
-   enables for better performance and smart caching
-   enables for smooth refactoring of the resulting App to microservices or micro-frontends if it gets too intertwined

#### FSM

The basic building block of state logic is a `FSM` (more specifically - a [Mealy Machine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mealy_machine)), which exposes a predefined `Transition Matrix` that comprises the relations between `States` and `Actions`, representing the decision tree of the machine. Every `Action`
type can have a derived `Payload` type, while every `State` has a dependent `Context`, and the latter two represent the current internal state of the machine.

`Actions`/`Payloads` and `States`/`Contexts` are enumerable values that can be composed of different Dictionaries, and can be reused independently on each other. It's perfectly fine to create several `FSMs` that operate either on the same set of `Actions` or `States`, or both.

#### Event Adapter

Unless `FSM` includes an `Event Adapater`, it would not accept or emit `Events` into the `Event Stack` and can only be controlled directly. However, in most cases it's desirable to connect it to the `Event Stack` via a pub/sub mechanism, which contains asymmetrical `Mapping Matrix`, that is responsible for:

-   Casting handled `Events` into `Actions`, including mapping of `Event Meta` to `Payload`
-   Producing `Events` from `State` changes, including mapping of `Context` to `Event Meta`

The reason `Event Adapter` is separated from `FSM` is reusability. If two `FSMs` share compatible contracts of `Actions`
and `States`, they can use the same `Event Adapter` too, if needed.

#### Predicates

`Predicates` are functions that return a Boolean value and are used to fork the flow of operations inside `FSMs`. All `Predicates` are high-order functions that allow compositing them. They come in three flavors:

-   `Built-in Predicates` are used to combine other `Predicates` and implement logical operations like `not`, `and` and so on.
-   `Model Predicates` have a `Data Model` as a dependency and are supposed to implement conditions that rely on the current state of `Application`
-   `Context Predicates` are bound to a certain `Slice` and its `State Dictionary`, and have a `State`/`Context` pair as a dependency. It's designed to create decision branching inside a `Transition Matrix`

#### Effects

`Effects` are pure high-order functions that update `Data Model` based on its current state and emitted `Events`, very similar to the way `FSMs` operate (and Redux's _reducers_). However, `FSMs` cannot alter the `Data Model` directly, locked inside their local scope, they can emit `Events` through the `Event Adapter`, which is mapped to a particular `Effect` by the `Effect Matrix` of the owning slice.

All the `Effects` triggered by different slices are batched every iteration of `Main Loop`, yielding exactly one (or none) `Data Model` update regardless of how many `FSM` transitions were performed.

#### Transformers

`Transformers` are projection-type functions that come with `Slice` and translate the same types between each other. They can be:

-   `Context Transformers` translate `Contexts` between each other. They are used inside `Transition Matrix` to update the internal data of the `FSM` when changing `States`. They are defined as a part of `State Dictionary`
-   `Reducer Transformers` translate from `State`+`Action/Payload` to `State/Context`
-   `Model Transformers` are a subtype of `Effects` which is context-free and is basically a function that mutates the `Data Model`. They can be composed with `Predicates` to produce `Effects`
-   `Generic Transformers` are built-in and user-defined pure functions that operate on any contract type and map the values. They are the basic building blocks of data manipulation.

#### Sources and Destinations

`Sources` and `Destinations` are abstractions for, respectively, input and output channels of the App. They include, but not limited to:

-   Internal Timers inside App
-   Remote API calls with various protocols for backend Apps
-   Hardware controls and UI interaction for frontend Apps
-   Message brokers, like Kafka or RabbitMQ
-   Network transports, like WebRTC or UDP streams
-   Environmental calls, i.e. pipes, sockets, system clock, file system, OS or WEB APIs

Every particular kind of `Source` or `Destination` is represented by a corresponding class:

-   `ISourceEmitter` for `Source` channels, which allows to declare rules of publishing `Events` from `Source`. That could be done via subscription, long and short polling or by exposing hook methods to be used directly throughout the App, notably in frontend `UI Components` and/or webserver routes.
-   `IDestinationGateway` for `Destination` channels, which observes the `Data Model` and propagates the required changes into the target endpoint

#### Storage

`Storage` is an adapter class to persist the `Data Model` and to load its snapshot, like:

-   LocalStorage for web apps
-   in-memory key storages, like Redis
-   Databases, like Mongo or Postgres
-   Physical and cloud file systems
-   Distributed storages like Blockchain or IPFS

The App can have multiple `Storages` which can store different subsets of `Data Model`. When the App starts, it polls all the Storages and integrates the received data into an initial `Data Model` snapshot, using composition of Selectors.

### Event Stack

Input streams (`UI Components` and `Sources`) and `FSMs` are emitting `Events`, that are put into a special LIFO structure, known as `Event Stack`. It is processed continuously by the `Main Loop`, which handles them one by one, always taking the last emitted `Event` and passing it to all connected `Slices`, and thus `FSMs`

#### Data Flow

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    box rgba(25,0,25,0.25) [Representation Layer]<br/>~~~</br>UIs, APIs, Sockets, Timers
    participant DST as Destinations
    participant SRC as Sources
    participant VL as UI
    actor User as I/O
    end
    box rgba(0,25,0,0.25) [Business Logic Layer]<br/>~~~</br>Declarative Code, Language Models, GUI Editor
    participant MT as Main Loop (Event Model)
    participant EA as Event Adapter (Mapping Matrix)
    participant FSM as FSM (Transition Matrix)
    participant ED as Effect Dictionary(Reduction Matrix)
    end
    box rgba(50,0,0,0.25) [Data Model Layer]<br/>~~~</br>Memory, DBs, Cloud Storage,<br/> File System, Blockchain
    participant MDL as Store (Anemic Data)
    participant DB as Storages (Persistent)
    end
    User -->> VL: User input
    DB -->> MDL: Sync application state on launch
    Note over SRC, User: Events are emitted by Sources
    VL -->> MT: TAutomataEventMetaType<eventId>
    SRC -->> MT: TAutomataEventMetaType<eventId>
    Note over MT: Incoming Events are pushed to Event Stack
    loop Process Event Stack every 1/60s
        Note over MT, ED: Pop Event from Event Stack
        activate MT
        MT ->>+ EA: TAutomataEventMetaType<eventId>
        rect rgba(25,25,25,0.5)
            Note over EA, FSM: Translates Events to Actions, as defined by Event Adapter
            EA ->> FSM: TAutomataEventMetaType<eventId> => TAutomataActionPayload<actionId>
            Note over FSM: Declarative Pure Function (Mealy Machine)<br/>Derives new Context based on incoming Actions and current Context
            FSM ->> FSM: TAutomataStateContext<stateId>, TAutomataActionPayload<actionId> => TAutomataStateContext<stateId>
            Note over EA, FSM: Translates Context to Event, as defined by Event Adapter
            FSM ->> EA: TAutomataStateContext<stateId>
        end
        Note over EA, MT: Emits Events based on resolved local Context
        EA ->>- MT: TAutomataStateContext<stateId> => TAutomataEventMetaType<eventId>
        note over MT: Push Event to Event Stack
        MT ->> MT: TAutomataEventMetaType<eventId>
        rect rgba(25,25,25,0.5)
            Note over MT, ED: Generate Effects as defined by Effect Matrix
            MT ->> ED: TAutomataEventMetaType<eventId>
            Note over ED, MDL: Update Model based on its current state and generated Events
            ED ->> MDL: TAutomataEventMetaType<eventId>, Store => Store
            MDL -->> DB: Sync to Storages
            MDL ->> MT: Proceed to the newest Event in Event Stack
        end
    end
    Note over MT: Store subscribers are updated
    MT -->>+ DST: Update Destinations based on Model changes
    MT -->>+ VL: Update UI based on Model changes
    VL -->>- User: Render
    DST -->>- User: API Calls
```
