---
title: Finite State Machine
---

# Finite State Machine

or shortly `FSM`, is a control object, that:

- has a limited list of control states, named just `State`
- stores local `Context` for every `State` and can modify it when transitioning to another `State`
- reacts to dispatched `Actions`, atomically transitioning to another `State`, based on current `Context` and
  dispatched `Payload`
- reacts to observed `Events`, translating them into `Actions`
- can emit `Events` when transitioning to certain `States`

More specifically, Yantrix implements [Mealy Machine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mealy_machine) out of [Mermaid](https://mermaid.js.org/) diagrams.

More on subject: 
* [State diagram](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/State_diagram)
* [Automata bases programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automata-based_programming)
* [Algorithmic state machine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algorithmic_state_machine)

## States

`State` is enumerable constant, specific for a particular business process. That process is then modeled as a graph of transitions between `States` and can declare rules of data transformation applied to each of them. 

The purpose of `State` to describe minimum variety of values that significantly impact the behavious of the modelled system. Modelling with `States` takes some practice, but in the end it grants a lot of benefits, some of them being:
- Atomicity of logic and clear responsibility patterns
- As much synchronous code as possible
- Transactional updates with pre-defined behaviour for each transition 
- Similar representation for various data sources, allowing for reproducible primitives and complex behaviours built from them

## Actions

`Actions` are dispatched to `FSM` via:

- an [API](../API%20reference/),
- using [Integrations](../integrations/)
- from `Event Bus` using `Event Adapter` and mappings, declared in the diagram

The `States` are switching as a reaction to an `Action` that might also carry a `Payload`. In the diagram `Actions` are declared as names of `State` transitions. If not specified, `Action` name is assigned automatically based on its traversal path

Note that by default declared `Actions` can only be dispatched when the `FSM` is in relevant `State`, otherwise the `Action` is ignored. If an `Action` is declared as transition from `[*]`, it can be invoked from any `State` and performs the corresponding transition.

## Forks

Nodes that are declared using Mermaid's `<<choice>>` directive are not translated into `States`, but rather represent a
conditional transition, that can resolve into different `States` and attached transition rules. To define a fork:

- create a `<<choice>>` node
- define an `Action` in the transition incoming to that node
- label the outgoing transitions from that node with a `Predicate` that can draw properties both from current `Context`
  and the incoming `Payload`.

**Notice:** `Predicates` are being validated in order of appearance, so mind the sequence.
